My gosh.
When your mind expands [music] to a
certain point in terms of what you might
consider reality to be, other entities
live there.
Dr. Gary Nolan is a wellrespected
microbiologist and geneticist [music]
at Stanford. Along with his PhD
students, he spun up multiple companies
that have sold for nine figures.
I look at a problem and I go, the tools
that everybody's using are not sharp
enough. With a lab in his name in a
corner office, Nolan in many ways
embodies a conventionally successful
academic. With one big exception, Dr.
Gary Nolan is deeply interested in the
subject of UFOs,
or as the Pentagon [music] likes to call
it, unidentified aerial phenomena.
Playing games with your mind [music]
like this, frankly, just keeps you
sharp.
But what distinguishes Dr. Gary Nolan
even more is that he's not just
intellectually interested in UFOs. I
mean, I have some in a locked bank
account.
He claims to have what may be UFO parts
in his possession.
A fisherman saw a glowing object and it
just [music] suddenly exploded.
And you'll have to stick around to the
end of this episode where we actually
see and discuss these UFO parts.
Why isn't the government immediately
funding this research?
Maybe the stuff that we have, somebody
is sitting around saying laughably,
[music] they're wasting their time on
exhaust. We have the engine. But before
you say, Jesse, what the [__] are you
talking about? This is absolutely
insane. The story gets even crazier.
Just a few years ago, the CIA actually
came knocking on Dr. Gary Nolan's door
for help.
At first, I thought it was a joke. I
really did. I was looking across the way
here to see if there was a camera.
The agency wanted to see if people who
had claimed UFO contact had any
neurological and physiological
differences. Nolan actually thinks that
these particular parts of the basil
ganglia called the codate nucleus and
the patamon could actually have
something to [music] do with people's
ability to see and encounter UFOs.
I mean alien means alien. [music]
They're either from another planet in
this galaxy or elsewhere or they're from
another level of reality that we don't
understand or they've been here all
along and [music] they just show up to
look at us because they're basically
maybe looking at [music] their past. So,
if you like crazy [__] like this and you
want more, hit subscribe now. And if you
haven't already, unbuckle your brain,
lean back, and get ready for this week's
American Alchemist, Dr. Gary Nolan.
Do you believe aliens exist?
Shut the [__] up.
Of course.
Oh, yeah. Of course. Could be.
Aliens don't exist.
Um, yes.
And they go, they're gone.
Thanks.
I'm here with my friend Dr. Gary Nolan
here at the Nolan Research Lab at
Stanford. Very few people, I think,
marry traditional science and uh the
study of anomalous kind of heterodox
subjects like UFOs and aliens. Where did
your interest stem from originally?
Somewhere very early on I started
reading science fiction. Do
you have any favorite authors or
more recently Ian Banks? I mean Arthur
C. Clark obviously amazing
and Arthur C. Clark wrote 2001 Space
Odyssey. Right. Right.
And I always found interesting, you
know, sort of the monolith
in 2001 Space Odyssey,
which is this sort of thing placed on
Earth that it inspires tech innovation.
It's almost like John Mack would talk
about a lot of these alien sightings
being slightly more advanced but barely
comprehensible tech for the time, almost
inspiring tech innovation.
I often think of it as uh laying
breadcrumbs in a direction. What are the
areas of microbiology that you're
currently most excited about?
So, right now, primarily, I would say
we're interested in cancer [music] and
understanding how cancer is put
together. This is a set of robots. You
program each station. Science in its
essence and scientists are capitalists.
Most of the biology scientists in the
country have some relationship to
studying cancer. Why? because the NCI,
the National Cancer Institute, is one of
the biggest institutes in the country
for doing out money. So you follow the
money and if there's no money for doing
this research and there's no positive
feedback for it and if anything negative
feedback, then the science doesn't
doesn't advance. This is a crucial
point. Despite the upper echelon of
society actually being pretty interested
in UFOs, it suffers from a severe lack
of resources. Just look at the main UFO
program over the last 15 years out of
the DoD. It's called ATIP or the
Advanced Aerospace Threat Identification
Program. ATIP has a $22 million budget.
Just compare that to fighter jet budgets
which often exceed hundred billion. In
other words, discovering
extraterrestrial life and even
propulsion that could be stepwise better
than what we currently have gets less
than 1% of the current F-35 budget.
Eventually, we'll get to the point where
we can laser beam our consciousness
across the the cosmos.
Why? Why aren't we there yet?
Oh. Um, funding.
From my point of view, when I got
involved, the CIA came to my office.
[music]
I mean, at first I thought it was a
joke. I really did. I was looking across
the way here at some of the other
offices [music] to see if there was a
camera. And so they said we had asked
around and everybody said that you've
built the best tool called SaitTo. I was
introduced to others who were I think
you people call them the invisible
college.
It was people like Jacques, people like
Hal [music] Kutoff,
uh Eric Davis and Robert Bigalow uh and
Col Kellaher. And then they showed me
MRIs of some of these people and most of
those people had interactions with UFOs
and these were Department of Defense and
intelligence people. So supposedly in
reasonably credible individuals. So in
looking at the MRIs of some of these
people, we noticed a area of the brain
that seemed to be disturbed, let's say,
or different in many of these
individuals. Uh so it's an area that
I've talked about before between the
head of the codate and epitamin that
increased neural density and it was
larger in all these individuals. And so
you just ask the question, okay, what's
unique about these individuals? Well,
they're all highly functioning and you
have to make snap decisions.
Mayday, mayday.
And so what is that? That's intuition. A
one way to explain it would be intuition
or just highly intelligent. And then
surprisingly, when we looked in the
family members, we found that the family
members had it.
Mhm.
Which was fascinating. So that means
that structure had a genetic component,
whatever it was.
Here's a question. Are you do you have a
genetic and phenotypic predisposition to
seeing the UFOs or post contact do you
now have a more neuronally dense codate
nucleus in potato?
No, I don't think I don't think it's
changed. They're just able to
as you say see it.
They're able to recognize it for what it
might be and not dismiss it. May maybe
it's allowing us to kind of widen the
doors of our normal limited scope of
perception and you're seeing these UFOs
that exist kind of interstatially in
reality that other people just can't
see.
Our senses are a filter to stop our
brains from being overwhelmed with
reality.
And so what we see is a limited aspect
of everything around us.
But that is a different model of reality
than people currently have today. But
it's one I'm sympathetic to, which is
that the sensory organs are not
necessarily productive. They're
reductive.
Oh, yeah. Absolutely. No, they're
Yes.
Yeah.
On a default state of almost greater
omniscience, but an inability to make
sense of right things.
Uh I I just don't know whether or not it
is an antenna or anything like that. Um
it just allows us to interpret things
better. Right? So for instance, there's
a form of Japanese chess which is a
smaller number of pieces etc. So they
took masters in this set up brainwave um
to figure out what area of the brain
might be involved with intuitive moves
where you're you you basically you make
the unexpected but brilliant correct
move and at those moments the codate
patamon lit up.
That's interesting. I find that
fascinating and we're actually working
on both and using both autism and
schizophrenics
because this area of the brain in both
autism and schizophrenia
is can be damaged.
But if you think a little bit about it,
you know, schizophrenics hear things and
see things that nobody else sees.
Yes.
So are are they all crazy?
Well, that goes into the transmission
theory. I think schizophrenics just
it's like a transmitter being
broken or oscillating between different
can't turn it off.
They can't turn it off.
So, we went deep on brain structures.
The other component of this is
materials.
I think a lot of people will be
incredibly excited that there are even
UFO materials that have been possibly
left behind. So,
Jacques Valet has collected these kinds
of materials from all over the world.
Jacqu Valet is pretty impressive in his
own right. He helped develop a
computerized map of Mars while at NASA
and he developed one of the early
versions of the internet called Arpanet
with Doug Engelbart. He's also the
inspiration for the French scientist
played by Francois Trufo in Steven
Spielberg's Close Encounters of the
Third Kind. Jacques was the original
person who put forth the
multi-dimensional hypothesis, the idea
[music] that aliens could coexist
alongside us but remain unseen.
For this, he received a lot of backlash
from other ufologists. In short, he was
too weird, even for the weirdest. Jacqu
Vallet publishes his address online so
people who witness UFO crashes across
the country can send him the parts, but
he has no real way of doing analysis on
the parts without sending them to a
doctor, Gary Nolan, who can do
spectroscopy [music] and real material
analysis on them.
The first question is, well, what was
unique about many of these samples? They
were ejected from these objects. One of
the most interesting samples Nolan
mentions is from Uba Tuba, Brazil, where
[music] a fisherman witnessed an
exploding orb off the coast and
collected some of the parts.
It turned out it was magnesium at an
extremely high level of purity, but
that's strange because magnesium burns
like hell.
So obviously it had something else in
it. So you know, we did a we did a mass
spectrometry analysis of some of those
pieces with a highly sensitive
instrument. um it's over in the
engineering department called a nano
sims. It's a secondary ion mass spec as
it's called. And basically what it lets
you what what it lets you do is
determine uh not just the elements by
their mass but also the isotopes
by their mass. Right? And one of them
was anomalous. The magnesium ratios were
way off.
I mean not even close to being
natural.
That's interesting. Yeah.
Right.
So you would never find this.
You would never find it in nature.
You never find it in nature.
And you'd need some sort of centrifuge
or something to create that. Yes.
Isotope ratio. Would that be possible?
Oh, it's possible. It's just expensive
beyond, you know,
most people don't have access to
centrifuges,
especially when these uh things were
found. And the moring question is why
would you do it?
Why would you do what's the motivation?
What's the motivation for it? Is it is
it something that they're using and they
need that ratio to accomplish something
or is it a byproduct of an of an effect
that where they take the natural things
and then they're doing something and
this ends up being the outcome and then
when they're done with it they go h and
they throw it out.
Right? Whether or not these objects are
trying to show us something or they
don't care. we see this happening and
that maybe tells you something. You
know, you can sort of reverse engineer
from first principles maybe what that
is. Nobody that I know has figured it
out.
When you look at the five observables of
the unidentified aerial phenomena task
force, things like transmedium travel,
uh you know, the ability to sort of
break conservation of momentum and stop
on a dime. are these possibly isotope
ratios that unlock these features.
That's what that's what you have to come
to a conclusion. It's used in something.
Maybe some of these things that we see
are not even technological. Maybe they
are some kind of living thing.
Well, some of the I remember like
Commander David Fraver, the Nimtt
sighting 2004, him saying looking at the
UFO and it's almost as if the thing sees
that he's looking at it and is conscious
and almost breathing.
They're all going against the wind. The
wind's 120 knots west. But if there's a
thing, it's rotating.
So, why isn't the government immediately
funding this research? I mean, it feels
insane.
You tell me. And maybe they have done
it. Maybe the stuff that we have,
somebody is sitting around saying
laughably, they're wasting their time,
right,
on exhaust,
we have the engine,
[music]
if something came from, you know, the
Andromeda galaxy and it's, you know,
it's a million years ahead of us, it
lands on Earth,
it has technology. techies that we don't
understand.
Some people think that aliens might be
us from the future. Yeah.
And if you think about the way we're
evolving, it's probably smaller bodies,
bigger heads.
Yeah.
You know, sort of what what you would
see a gray alien looking like.
Do you think aliens exist?
[__] yeah.
I saw the lights in the sky.
I heard about a friend who got attacked
by one.
You know what the most common type of
alien is?
Light.
Really? Light is an alien?
Uh, as in like laser beams. They were
little gangly creatures, you know, look
like squids, you know, tentacles.
How'd you know it was a UFO? It was just
traveling too fast for normal plane.
Was it totally a normal the movement?
So, it was very, very fast.
I've always been interested in the 5% I
don't know. I'll publish the 95% I do
know. Yeah.
But I'm always interested in the stuff
that I can't explain because almost
every major discovery Yeah. has been
somebody looking at anomalous data and
then constructing a new theory. Yes. Of
reality.
Yes.
Right. And that's Thomas Cun's structure
of scientific revolutions.
The notion that almost every scientific
revolution was fought tooth and nail
by the more conservative
skeptics saying you can't possibly be
right. And Thomas [__] was friends with
John Mack who was Yeah.
the head of the Harvard psychiatry
department who spent the latter part of
his career studying
alien abductions which is I didn't know
that.
Yeah. And he encouraged him
to to do the study.
Cool. That's that's interesting.
Yeah.
I'm going to use that in my talks.
You should.
Um you know that's I think where we're
at right now. the preponderance of
evidence now and the Department of
Defense admitting that these things are
real, that the data is real.
Not what the there's no conclusions.
Yeah.
Um the data is real.
The theory maybe I like best is the
Jacques Valle uh Diana Pulka theory that
1947 in the Roswell crash represented
this dividing line. Mhm.
And before that, people were seeing
angels, demons, leprechauns, fairies,
whatever the sort of local contemporary
lore of where the sighting took place
was.
And then after aliens became something
in the zeitgeist, that's what people
started to see. But you're seeing some
sort of kind of protoarchitecture of a
thing that involves
beings and crafts
and then you're recollecting it in this
way that is comprehendable to you given
kind of like the the noble myth or the
myth of the time,
right? I use the example of let's say
that there's a a race of intelligent
ants out in your garden.
Mhm.
They don't have a clue what's going on
up in the kitchen.
Mhm.
Right. They couldn't understand it if
they wanted to. And neither could you
understand what their communications
are. How do you talk to them?
Well, the first thing you would probably
do is make a little thing that looks
like an ant.
Yeah.
And put it there.
And have it do something.
Yeah.
And so [music] maybe that's what it is.
Maybe that I mean, alien means alien.
Yeah.
Right. I mean, it's so far different
from us that it's doing its best to talk
to us
in ways that it can [music] do. Mhm.
They're either from another planet in
this galaxy or elsewhere underground or
nearby or whatever and they just show up
to look at us and because they're
basically maybe looking at their past or
they're interdimensional or they're from
another level of reality that we don't
understand. All speculation.
Yeah.
But fun.
You can run your mind down those
possibilities and realize how much
bigger a universe you live in. It's
exciting
than what you're dealing with daytoday.
Yes.
To have a group of scientists who are
supposed to be leading thinkers debase
people who are interested in thinking
about new ideas is to me that's
heretical
and it feels like it's gotten worse in
terms of um established scientists. Like
talk about like the Fermy paradox which
is like the
sort of mental model around like
question of like you know why why don't
we see aliens that's enrio fermy that
guy created the theoretical
underpinnings for splitting the atom
right you know he was in the Manhattan
project sort of as conventionally well
regarded as it gets and he was thinking
about aliens in his off time at Los
Alamos right so it's like
why can't we do that
when your mind expands to a certain
point in terms of what you might
consider reality to be [music]
other entities live there.
So, this should be a rallying cry to
anybody watching. On the financing
front, is there any way we can see the
materials?
Uh, I mean, I
have some in a locked bank account.
Bank. Honestly, I didn't I don't have it
hanging around here.
Okay. Okay.
I could do a video for you and send it.
This is also an easy flight, so I can
come back up. Whatever is it? Oh, okay.
Professor Gary Nolan, thanks for having
us back. We're here a week later. Very
excitingly, we we have parts uh of
possible UFO crashes. So, what's the
background on what we're looking at now?
Okay. The parts were a little
antilimactic and small, but he claims to
have much bigger parts that we can't see
due to national security sensitivities.
But let's just take these three facts
combined about the parts that are on the
table. Number one, observers with no
real monetary incentive to lie claim to
see a vehicle that broke the bounds of
our current understanding of aerospace
limitations. Two, the materials contain
isotope ratios that do not exist
naturally [music] on Earth. And number
three, a top Stanford microbiologist
isn't ruling out the fact that these
parts could be of extraterrestrial
origin. Given all that, even though
these pieces are small, I think they
should get you pretty excited. And we
now know that isotope ratios might have
more to do with the properties of the
material themselves and the features and
what the material can actually do in the
physical world than we had previously
thought. Right.
Right. Correct. The odd thing was that
the other piece which supposedly came
from the same event had exactly the
correct isotope ratios as to what you
would find on Earth. The material up
front was what we would say
inhomogeneous or partially mixed. It's
kind of like if you were to take
chocolate ice cream and vanilla ice
cream and then just do a bit little bit
of a swirl, you would see a mixture and
we would call that inhomogeneous. Why
would you mix some of these elements?
Yeah,
there's actually again no good reason.
There's no metal that people normally
make that have some of the mixtures that
we've seen. That's interesting.
That's worthy of investigation.
Yeah, sure.
So, that covers all of the anomalies
about the pieces of magnesium coming
from Uba [snorts] tuba. But what about
the other sample on the table? Those are
pieces of bismouth. Nolan [music]
actually couldn't recall how it was
procured, so he had to call Hal Putoff
to get the full scoop. Hal.
Hi, Hal.
Dr. Halpoff has one of the most
interesting careers of all time. He was
first a laser physicist and then out of
Stanford Research Institute. He started
the government's psychic spy program.
Since then, he's been doing frontier
tech research and has briefed multiple
presidents on UFOs.
So, do you know the original story of
how it was kind of procured initially?
Story was that it was sent anonymously
by someone claiming to be an army
officer.
Long story short, this army officer was
going through his grandfather's archives
when he found this rare sample. And then
written in the diary was that it was a
piece from
uh Roswell.
True or not, these thin layers of
bismouth magnesium are very hard to
reproduce. Howal claims that they even
have the properties to microize wave
guides for terraertz frequencies.
It turns out that it reduces the size of
the required uh microwave guide for terz
frequencies down to about 130th of the
wavelength which is which is amazing. So
it means you can basically put 30 wave
guides in the volume of a single wave
guide at terahertz frequency.
Got it. Thanks a lot. How really
appreciate it.
What can you do with terraertz that we
can't with current? It's just more pack
in more information.
Pack in more information faster,
farther. Yeah,
terraertz is the next thing for
communication that if we can get
terraertz waves uh working efficiently,
there's a whole slew of other electronic
and radio communication uh things that
could be done that can't be done now.
Shouldn't there be things that we're
doing with these materials that show
what environments they can sort of
withstand or what possible properties
they have as as well? So like super high
velocity, you know, like like uh
literally like slingshot them like as
fast as you can or like putting them in
super cold environments or super hot.
The transmedium thing, making sure they
don't rust underwater because a lot of
the UAPs seem to
submerge underwater and then come out of
the water. Like basic things like that
based on the observables,
you know. I mean, you could run
electricity across them, see if
anything's different. Are they
conductors? Are they are they
insulators? You know, again, this is why
I think it's important to get this kind
of information out so that even a
skeptic could suggest what should be
done. You know, I mean, there's a a
number of people who who have them. I
get emails occasionally from people.
Actually, there's one that I just got in
the last few weeks an email from
somebody who uh it's a a glowing object
that drops molten metal.
But I haven't seen it yet. I've just
seen pictures of it.
Got it. So, but it's interesting enough
that I'm actually going to follow
through on that one.
Yeah. And this should be we should have
some sort of standardized process.
Exactly. There's like a flowchart that
you could put together of what should be
done. And once you've got that
process, things just go in one end and
come out the other and then you give it
to the true believers and to the
skeptics and let them fight with data
rather than, you know, hearsay. [music]
Do you think [music] if they're hyper
intelligent aliens, they're aware that
you're looking into them?
I I would presumably, right?
Presumably, but or they don't care.
Yeah.
Or they say there's nothing you're going
to be able to figure out about this.
Yeah.
So, we don't care. Or it's left behind
almost as a you figure it out and you
can have it.
Mhm. You know, the breadcrumb trail.
That's what it feels like.
Yeah.
Last question for you. Roswell 1947.
Trinity, that crash was 1945
uh where the sort of larger piece came
from. Do you [music] think that aliens
are possibly interested in us uh
splitting the atom? So, do you think
they're interested in not only nuclear
power and our own possibly destruction
of ourselves, but figuring out the
building blocks of uh base layer
reality? And so, when we split the atom,
they become more interested. And then
maybe they're interested in the fact
that we're figuring out our own genetic
building blocks as well. Well, I mean,
from their perspective, let's say a
million years ahead of them, they they
know that we're maybe a few hundred
years from, you know, spreading in our
local galactic arm, even if only by
conventional craft. Do they want a bunch
of angry monkeys running around with
bombs? You know, they probably want to
keep tabs on us,
right?
I would, right?
You know, I mean, if if I've got a
neighbor
Yeah. who is, you know, bristling with
with armaments.
Yeah.
And always cursing and throwing stuff
around. I might want to keep tabs on
them.
Yeah.
And we're we're a bunch of angry monkeys
right now.
[screaming]
Well, Dr. Nolan, appreciate it. This was
awesome. And I I hope we make real pro I
hope we go through the step [music]
sequence of science that it takes to
figure out what the [music] hell these
things are and what they do. If you
haven't already, but you like these
conversations with highly intelligent
yet frontier people working on the
things that will define [music] the
future, please hit subscribe now. Until
next time, I'm Jesse Michaels and this
is [music] American Alchemy.